Ant task to automatically convert to a simple shim layout (#7561)
NVIDIA/spark-rapids: docs/dev/shimplify.md

---
layout: page
title: Shim Source Code Layout Simplification with Shimplify
nav_order: 8
parent: Developer Overview
---

# Shim Source Code Layout Simplification with Shimplify

This document describes the next iteration of shim source code maintenance. It addresses the
drawback introduced with the [shim layer rework][1] resulting in the guaranteed ABI-compatible
bytecode management for each of the 14 currently supported Spark builds but at the expense of
maintaining 50+ directories. Many shims are spread over an overlapping set of directories making it
hard to determine where to make additions while keeping code duplication in check.

[shimplify.py][2] is the new goal in the Maven build binding to the `generate-sources` phase.

* It defines a new simpler shim directory structure where there is only a single directory per shim,
and a special comment is injected to define metadata defining all the shim builds it participates in.
* It can convert all or a subset of existing shims to the new build. The build can support partially
converted shims if a longer transition is desired.

## Simplified Shim Source Directory Structure

> In our build each supported Apache Spark build and its corresponding Shim is identified by its

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our build each supported Apache Spark build and its corresponding shim is identified by its
```

complexity on top of an inherently complex directory structure already. As an example this is one of
such warnings:

```text
shimplify - WARNING - Consider consolidating 312db, it spans multiple dedicated directories ['/home/user/gits/NVIDIA/spark-rapids/sql-plugin/src/main/312db/scala', '/home/user/gits/NVIDIA/spark-rapids/sql-plugin/src/main/31xdb/scala']
```

* For the shimplify directory structure all files under `src/(main|test)/spark*` directories
are read to parse the `spark-rapids-shim-json-lines` comments. It performs the following
validations:

  * It makes sure that the comment is present and can be parsed
  * The list of shims is non-empty (e.g., has not orphaned through dropping shims) and sorted.
  * The file is stored under the *owner shim* directory.

* All files participating listing the `buildver` of the current Maven build session are symlinked to
`target/${buildver}/generated/src/(main|test)/(scala|java)`. Thus, instead of hardcoding distinct
lists of directories for `build-helper` Maven plugin to add (one for each shim) after the full
transition to shimplify, the pom will have only 4 add source statements that is independent of the
number of supported shims.

> With the shimplify format in place it is easy to review all the files for a single Shim without

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the shimplify format in place it is easy to review all the files for a single shim without
```

It is not expected to be really necessary but it is possible to convert a subset of the shims

* Either by adding -Dshimplify.shims=buildver1,buildver2,... to the commands above
* Or by specifying a list of directories you would like to delete to have a simpler directory
-Dshimplify.dirs=311until340-non330db,320until330-noncdh

The latter is just a minor twist on the former. Instead of having an explicit list of shims, it
first computes the list of all `buildver` values using provided directories. After this *all* the
files for the shims, not just under specified directories are converted.

In both cases, the conversion does not leave the rest of the shims totally unaffected when
there are common files with a specified shim. However, it guarantees to leave the previous dedicated
files under `src/(main|test)/${buildver}` in place for shims outside the list. This is useful when
developers of a certain shim would like to continue working on it without adapting the new method.
However, for the simplicity of future refactoring the full transition is preferred.

## Adding a new Shim

Shimplify can clone an existing shim based as a basis of the new shim. For example when adding

> support for a new [maintenance][5] version of Spark, say 3.2.4, it's expected to be similar to 3.2.3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
support for a new [maintenance][5] version of Spark, say 3.2.4, it's expected to be similar to 3.2.3.
```

Reviewer: This comment was not addressed.

If just 3.2.3 or all shims after the full transition have already been converted you can execute

```bash
mvn generate-sources antrun:run@shimplify=shim-sources -Dshimplify=true \
    -Dshimplify.move=true -Dshimplify.overwrite=true \
    -Dshimplify.add.shim=324 -Dshimplify.add.base=323
```

to clone 323 as 324. This will add `{"spark": "324"}` to every shared file constituting the 323
shim. Moreover, it will create

* a copy of dedicated 323 files with spark323 under spark324 shim
directory
* substitute spark324 for spark323 in the package name and path,
* and modify the comment from `{"spark": "323"}` to `{"spark": "324"}`

> Review the new repo state, e.g., using `git grep '{"spark": "324"}'`
> Besides of having to add the `release324` profile to various pom.xml as before, this is likely to be insufficient to complete the work on 324. It is expected to work on resolving potential compilation
> failures manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Review the new repo state, e.g., using `git grep '{"spark": "324"}'`.
Besides having to add the `release324` profile to various pom.xml as before, this alone
is likely to be insufficient to complete the work on 324. It is expected you will need to
work on resolving potential compilation failures manually.
```

time of this writing) have a new set of special sibling directories
`src/(main|test)/spark${buildver}`.

Previous `src/(main|test)/${buildver}` and
version-range-with-exceptions directories such as `src/main/311until340-non330db` are deprecated and
will be removed soon as a result of the conversion to the new structure.

`shimplify` changes the way the source code is shared among Shims by using an explicit
lexicographically sorted list of `buildver` property values
in a source-code level comment instead of the shared directories.

```scala
/*** spark-rapids-shim-json-lines
{"spark": "312"}
{"spark": "323"}
spark-rapids-shim-json-lines ***/
```

The content inside the tags `spark-rapids-shim-json-lines` is in the [JSON Lines][4] format where
each line is an extensible object with the Shim metadata currently consisting just of the Spark
build dependency version. The top object in the comment, the minimum version in the comment
intuitively represents the first version of Spark requiring shimming in the plugin, albeit it might
not be the original one as support for older Spark releases is eventually dropped. This `buildver`
is called the *owner shim*.

> On the default read-only invocation path of the Maven build shimplify does not make any changes to
> shim source code files and their locations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, the Shimplify invocation runs in read-only mode and doesn't make any changes to the shim sources or their locations.
```

relying on Maven:

```bash
git grep '{"spark": "323"}' '*.scala' '*.java'
```

## Conversion to the Shimplify-based Directory Structure

Shimplify can automatically convert the prior version-range-with-exceptions directory structure to
the simplified version. This allows to make it an atomic transition without having to resolve
almost unavoidable merge conflicts due to the sheer size of this sweeping change while the shim
development is ongoing. The conversion of the shims source code and the regular build should not
be done simultaneously for faster isolation and correction of potential bugs in the conversion code.

Prior to invoking the conversion standalone, you first run

```bash
mvn clean install -DskipTests
```

on the current state of the `spark-rapids` repo.

After that you can execute conversion in one or more iterations depending on specified -D parameters

```bash
mvn generate-sources antrun:run@shimplify-shim-sources -Dshimplify=true [-D...]
```

With `-Dshimplify=true`, shimplify is put on the write call path to generate and inject
spark-rapids-shim-json-lines comments to all shim source files. The files are not yet moved to their

> owner shim directory, and so it is easy to verify with `git diff` the comments being injected. If

Reviewer 2: As this tool matures, we may want to do this in a single step, so the default value for `-Dshimplify.move` will need to be true, may be not now but later.

> owner shim directory, and so it is easy to verify with `git diff` the comments being injected. If
> you see any issue you can fix its cause and re-execute the command with by adding
> `-Dshimplify.overwrite=true`. However, it is usually easier to just have git restore the
> previous state:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
owner shim directory, and so it is easy to verify with `git diff` the comments being injected. If
you see any issue you can fix it and re-execute the command by adding
`-Dshimplify.overwrite=true`. However, it is usually easier to just have git restore the
previous state:
```

```bash
git restore sql-plugin tests
```

Once the shim comments looks good (as expected, it was tested), you can repeat it and now actually
move the files to designated locations by invoking

```bash

> mvn generate-sources antrun:run@shimplify=shim-sources -Dshimplify=true -Dshimplify.move=true

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
mvn generate-sources antrun:run@shimplify-shim-sources -Dshimplify=true -Dshimplify.move=true
```

Author: thanks, I dropped antrun:run altogether because it runs shimplify twice, as bound to the phase generates-sources and explicitly.

In both cases, the conversion does not leave the rest of the shims totally unaffected when
there are common files with a specified shim. However, it guarantees to leave the previous dedicated
files under `src/(main|test)/${buildver}` in place for shims outside the list. This is useful when
developers of a certain shim would like to continue working on it without adapting the new method.
However, for the simplicity of future refactoring the full transition is preferred.

### Evolving shims without automatic conversion

Suppose a bulk-conversion of existing shims is not an option whereas the next shimming issue
requires difficult refactoring of version ranges with adding more directories with exceptions.
Now it can be resolved easily by placing just the affected files to owner shim directories and
adding shim JSON lines comments by hand.

## Adding a new shim

Shimplify can clone an existing shim based as a basis of the new shim. For example when adding
support for a new [maintenance][5] version of Spark, say 3.2.4, it's expected to be similar to 3.2.3.

If just 3.2.3 or all shims after the full transition have already been converted you can execute

```bash

> mvn generate-sources antrun:run@shimplify=shim-sources -Dshimplify=true \

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
mvn generate-sources antrun:run@shimplify-shim-sources -Dshimplify=true \
```

    -Dshimplify.move=true -Dshimplify.overwrite=true \
    -Dshimplify.add.shim=324 -Dshimplify.add.base=323
```

to clone 323 as 324. This will add `{"spark": "324"}` to every shared file constituting the 323
shim. Moreover, it will create

* a copy of dedicated 323 files with spark323 under spark324 shim
directory
* substitute spark324 for spark323 in the package name and path,
* and modify the comment from `{"spark": "323"}` to `{"spark": "324"}`

Review the new repo state, e.g., using `git grep '{"spark": "324"}'`.
Besides having to add the `release324` profile to various pom.xml as before, this alone
is likely to be insufficient to complete the work on 324. It is expected you will need to
work on resolving potential compilation failures manually.

> ## Deleting a Shim

Reviewer 2: Probably makes sense to have a follow-on to pass a flag to drop support of a shim from command-line and the shimplify.py should take care of all of this.

Every Spark build is de-supported eventually. To drop a build say 311 you can run a bulk
search&replace in your IDE deleting all occurrences of `{"spark": "311"}` including the newline
character an empty line. Shimplify will fail the build until all the orphaned files are removed.

After adding or deleting shims you can run the integration tests above.

## Symlinks & IDE

IDEs may or may not reveal whether a file is accessed via a symlink. IntelliJ IDEA treats the
original file path and a path via a symlink to the same file as two independent files by default.

In the context of shimplify, only the generated symlink path is part of the project
because the owner shim path is not `add-source`d during build and therefore during IDEA Project
Import. The user can install the [Resolve Symlinks][6] plugin to prevent IDEA from opening multiple
windows for the same physical source file. As of the time of this writing, it works seamlessly with
the exception when the file is open via a Debugger either on a breakpoint hit or subsequent clicking
on the affected stack frame in which case you will see an extra editor tab being added.

> No matter whether or not you use the Resolve Symlinks plugin, IDEA is able to add a break point

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
No matter whether or not you use the [Resolve Symlinks][6] plugin, IDEA is able to add a breakpoint
```
